Um, welcome to you both.
Thank you very much for coming here today.
So, uh, as you know, uh, we're very interested to explore,
um, the recommendations, uh, particularly around the,
the audit general's, uh, report itself,
and hopefully that was a good guidance for you
and what we wanted to, uh, talk to you about and discuss.
Uh, today. Clearly, we're wanting to make sure that, that we
as the crown, that's also the many other entities
that have obligations, undertreating settlements, are, uh,
doing their best to, to meet the, uh, obligations,
I suppose, and, and the relationships
that see going forward itself.
So I thought maybe how we could start is perhaps some
opening comments from yourself with regards to it.
Um, and then we can perhaps delve into some conversations,
some questions as no ma Thank you.
Uh, o
uh, thank you for seeing, for seeing us this morning.
Turn to my colleague.
I am the ua, the national, uh, Maori manager
for Maori Crown Partnerships and System leadership.
So I sit, um, with Richard in that part.
Um, so we're attending here at your request, uh,
to outline our approach to our treaty settlement commitments
and meeting them, um, to identify, address the challenges,
any challenges and issues
that we have faced in implementing those commitments.
And that leads quite naturally to
therefore how we are responding
to the auditor General's report.
Uh, the one leads to the other quite, quite naturally.
Um, as a Crown entity, we are not directly part
of treaty settlement obligation treaty settlement
negotiations, but some settlements do lead
to specific obligations on us.
Um, VER tends to be a, so far
that has been a minority of settlements.
Um, and also we have, they tend to come to us
as quite narrow and specific obligations,
and that's not indicative at all of the extent
and breadth of engagement that we would have
with Iwi Hu group model across the motto.
Um, so I'll just talk quickly about our counter across sort
of facts and figures on our settlements.
Um, we have specific obligations under 17 settlements.
Uh, and there are basically four categories of obligation
that we have, right?
So first, refusal deferred selection properties,
place name changes on roads, so signage, uh,
and relationship redress.
Um, 14 of the settlements contain RFR obligations,
and these identify there are 79 confirmed RFR identified
RFR properties and two wider areas over which there are
presumed rfr for any crown land,
any property within those areas.
Um, according
to our surplus disposal records over the last 10 years,
we've disposed
of actually 230 property interests across both FRS
and MA protection mechanism.
Uh, we follow have
to follow the Crown land disposal process, uh, managed by,
uh, land Information New Zealand,
and that picks up every aspect of property disposal,
whether it's RFR or protection mechanism
or PWA offer back, it's all through the same process.
Uh, and we follow that process
and that ensures effectively
that when land is declared surplus,
those RFR obligations are met.
Um, the key improvement for us, let's go straight there,
is I said the two 30.
Um, we are not actually able on our current records
to distinguish between the specific properties that were RFR
and which were multi protection mechanism.
So the bit that we're,
we are particularly focused is actually the closing
the loop in the record keeping.
We follow the process, we're confident in the due diligence
and everything that goes into that.
Where we need to improve is maturing that kind
of closing the loop with our record keeping,
and then our ability to engage specifically on that.
With Mano or with our, with our partner treaty partners.
Um, deferred selection properties,
we had just two deferred selection
properties across three settlements.
Um, they lapsed times on those have passed,
so they are now RFR properties
and treated as such, uh, in our processes and records.
Um, there was some early stage correspondence many,
uh, eight or nine years ago in relation to one
of those properties, uh, sorry, in relation to some
of those properties from one partner.
It's unclear to us actually subsequently over the years how
that actually landed and ended up.
So again, this points to, uh, we need
to be much more systematic in our record keeping.
Um, in terms of place name changes, uh, these are things
that we have pretty routinely
and all the time, specifically from settlements,
we had eight place name change commitments to meet.
Um, those changes are made
through the pro, the standard process.
The New Zealand geographic board, gazettes, the name change,
uh, those name changes are routinely checked by all
of our maintenance contractors, and they are rolled out into
new signage replacement where there's some major name change
to some large area or, or
or town on a large, on a large state highway route.
We will tend to accelerate that.
It'll bring it faster than the normal maintenance program
would replace signage.
Um, all those set, those name changes were from 1997
to 2003 settlements over 20 years ago now.
Um, and in terms, so then in terms of relationship redress
and relationship agreements, we have just one settlement
that sort of specifically sets out that, um, on part
of our due diligence as we've picked this up to me
and myself in the last year, um, we've identified that
that relationship hasn't been monitored effectively.
So we are now in the process of picking that up
and trying to get it reestablished, understand
what has gone on and where it needs to go from here.
It's worth also just touching quickly on, uh,
other treaties settlement commitments.
So whilst we're not directly named, we are,
we do participate in three holder government Accords, uh,
TKI Wai Accord and Accord.
Um, none of those I think have specific requirements on us,
although there is capacity to expand the scope
of those accords within them, particularly Y Wire.
Um, but we are actively participating in those in terms
of the things that affect transport and procurement
and supply chain management.
Um, so that's kind of a quick counter across some facts
and figures around our treaty settlements
and the specific obligations.
In terms of the challenges, uh,
first thing we'd probably call out is, uh, funding.
We receive no operational funding commitments in relation
to, to our treaty settle commitments,
but everything that we have been committed to
by existing settlements
so far is all just absorbed within our routine
business as usual budgets.
So the place name changes, we absorb
that within our normal maintenance and operations budgets.
The property disposal cost, the cost
of running property disposals, it's just part
of our normal property disposals program.
So funding has not been, uh, a challenge
for us in that respect.
Um, what has been where, where we have identified areas
of improvement, I've kind of already signaled that, um,
our information and records,
the processes might be happening,
but we have need to close the loop
and be much more systematic in how we kind of track
and keep our records up to date.
Um, with the information, kind of with
that information loop closing, we need to improve monitoring
and evaluation processes that we have around this.
A again, to systematize, our challenge is, is basically
around systematizing that, um,
across all current future settlements.
Um, we have all of our information
as we currently understand it, into hi the, uh,
uni Corty database on settlement commitments.
And from next year we will be, uh,
publishing in our annual report, uh,
information on the meeting of our specific obligations.
Um, we currently also have a, uh, statement
of performance expectation measure that measures the quality
of our relationships with, uh,
treaty partners across the country.
Um, but we'll be picking up the much more detailed
reporting, uh, on that from next year.
And then kind of with it internally, we need
to again clarify, there are some clarification of roles,
responsibilities, and accountabilities, basically to get
that systematized systematic approach across
the entire agency.
Uh, and with that, uh, we have, uh, a number
of staff whose entire jobs are to engage with MANA
and engage with Iwi and Maori business
and stuff around the, around the tu.
Um, they also support other teams in the performing their
obligations and in running projects and managing projects.
Uh, but we need to lift the capability overall,
generally kind of across the organization, uh,
which is probably a narrative quite wide in Wellington.
So, um, can, just to conclude those remarks, um,
the specific settlement obligations
to which we are subject are relatively narrowly defined,
but they, and therefore they don't actually cover the, kind
of the full gamut of activity which we engage with Iwi,
Maori Hapu, uh, Maori business as well.
Um, there's nothing particular around road safety,
for instance, or driver license
promotion, all of these kind of things.
It's been quite narrowly confined
around property matters and signage.
Um, the majority, all of these, such as the RFIs
and signage changes are managed
through processes which pick up
and make sure that the obligations are dealt to.
But as I said already, uh, where we do need to improve is
that information recording
and the kind of systematic view so that we can,
we can positively confirm
and affirm that we have met the obligations even though we
we're still nonetheless be competent, for instance, in the,
the land disposals process
and that we've complied with all requirements there.
Uh, I'm happy to take any questions from the committee.
Thank you very much, Richard,
and that's a very good, uh, summation of
where you're at itself
and, uh, pleasing that you've also focused on what some
of the challenges are itself.
So if I may just start with the, the first one,
and we've gotta understand, you know, the context
of this engagement is to try
and improve the performance of the crown across the board.
Okay. So take it in that light please. Yep.
Um, but you know, what, if a lay person listening to that,
uh, may sort of take the opinion, well, clearly this area of
what Cortas business is not high enough priority for it
to have its own budget, to have, um, the lifting
of the capability to have, you know, all the things
that you've spoken of, each of challenges.
So what would you comment on
with the fact of that statement?
You know, you are clearly this is not a
priority for what could they?
Um, well actually firstly, um,
we established last year Fire Two's position
and the team reporting to Fire two.
And that was deliberately to be a lot of our, we have a lot
of resource working on Maori engagement
and our partnership relationships.
It tends to be quite location specific and project specific.
The establishment of Fire Two's team was very deliberately
to make sure the organization had that capability
at the total organization level
and kind of taking the national view.
Yep. So, uh, in that respect, no, that,
and that has been placed in my area,
which is basically the strategy function for Waka Corte.
So we've put
that central centrally into the
strategy function of the organization.
So, um, with all due respect, uh, the appointment
and I see, and, uh, I, uh, um, see the two
and also see a lu behind us that's obviously got a role in,
uh, the Maori space, if you could say that
of the organization, which is great to see.
And perhaps the question I could direct to you,
do you feel frustrated in your ability to be able
to do your job of meeting the obligations
of the organization that you represent?
Because that's, once again, I'm trying to get
to the point here of what are you, you've talked about
what your challenges are, but I want, wanna understand
what your frustrations are because we as a committee can go
and ask questions of other levels within organizations
to see what we're doing to get a better outcome.
Um, um, KDA, um, my team has been established, um,
to really look at the strategy function,
but one of the, um, opportunities we do have is, is, um,
fixing the system for treaty settlement implementation.
Um, I think what is challenging is
that we have obviously gaps in our record keeping
and um, uh, monitoring and evaluation,
but also we need to fix those
'cause we still have settlement commitments coming through.
So from a system perspective, we do need to identify
and deal with the gaps now.
So yes, it is frustrating,
but also in a positive light we need to deal with those gaps
around record keeping, um,
and, um, capability growth to ensure
that those settlements coming through, um,
actually have a can, we can lift our game a little bit more
and how we provide advice in that, in that area,
and also track that whole area, which we haven't,
haven't done well, um, in the past.
So, um, hopefully that answers your
Question. Uh, uh, go
to Dan. So what is the time, uh, line
for you actually getting on top of those ones
that you're trying to catch up with?
What, what, what sort of, uh,
impetus are you putting in getting that
to the position you want it to be?
Well, also it's a top priority to his team.
Uh, and we have a whole process underway at the moment in
terms of validating the information that we do have,
identifying those gaps and putting that in place.
Uh, my expectation is we'll get most of
that nailed within the next six months.
Um, if we're back here in front of this committee,
for instance, in a year, unable to say that, uh,
you guys will have words and we'll deserve them.
Thank you Richard de
Thank you, Mr. And
my question is, um, uh, one of the things that we, um,
observe is the, that times there's a breakdown between
where a trigger settlement happens, um, and it's done
and it's ticked off and everybody goes, feel,
that's lucky we've done that, aren't we clever?
Um, and the actual, uh, communication of
what your obligations might be under that
to different organizations and departments.
Can you just describe to me, um,
how that system works for you?
So how, how do, how are you advised of the obligations, um,
does that work and could it be better, more timely,
more specific, you know, how, how does that look
for you? There
We go. Um,
so, uh, where I sit within the organization, um,
my purview is actually over treating negotiations.
So therefore I do get a sense of what's coming in
to provide advice on those specific, um, settlements if, if,
um, if need be.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh, most of our work in, uh,
the advisory capacity is if the, the negotiating group
actually requests a relationship agreement.
I know that we only have one that we have, um, that's gone
through the process that we're looking at fixing,
but that is probably where we see the most, um,
activity happening and, and,
and negotiating that, um, agreement.
Um, then it tracks through into the legislation.
And unless there's a, uh, relationship agreement
or something like a letter of introduction to the ce,
we do tend, to your point Richard, about, um,
poor record keeping and registers.
We do kind of, we, we do, um, have a real gap
between legislation and then implementation.
So we can't, so there definitely needs to be those, um,
system it does need, need
to be fixed going forward in that area.
So we actually do have a greater, um, appreciation
of all our obligations.
And as we, I know we are talking about the crown here,
but we are a crown entity
and we do sit, we don't sit at the negotiating table.
Yeah. So obviously, um,
all our communications are, are through, um,
Great, thank you.
Um, that confirms what, um, I thought just one, can I,
one up question.
Um, it might not be applicable to you so much
as other departments, but, uh, once you understand
what your obligations are,
and it might be to your point about capability,
but once you understand what your obligations are
and what you are required to do, how is
that relationship agreement
or that obligation then communicated to the people who need
to deal with it on the ground?
Uh, because example, you know, a treaty settlement, um,
and I and, uh, in your part of the, our part of the world,
for example, will tell me outta here will tell me time
and time again, we have these relationship agreements,
but the entities that are delivering them on the ground,
the frontline people on the ground
that they have their relationships with,
like regional managers and
what you sometimes don't know about it.
So how do you make sure that the people on the ground,
your relationship managers know
that there's a relationship agreement,
Um, at this point?
So I'll just talk about the relationship
agreement for the treaty settlement.
Yeah, there is no particular that hasn't been triggered yet.
Um, so that is good.
And you only have the one, we only have the one treaty
settlement relationship agreement.
There are other relationship agreements outside the scope.
Um, I don't have the detail on those,
but in relation to this, um, we do need to work out
what has happened because it will affect our relationship
and their aspirations
that they've actually put forward in a training
settlement and filling those.
So that is a gap that we're working on.
Okay, great. Thank you. Thank you.
Generally, generally that would come back to in terms
of the structures internally, we have our directors
of regional relationships that kind of own
the relationships, the major, major relationships, whether
that be mana or local councils
or businesses in a given area.
They're reach supported by a port whose job is there
specifically around education with mining communities.
And it's generally the DRR
and the who would be directly doing negotiating
and finalizing the relationship agreement,
taking it specific obligations forward
to the points both of us have made.
There is some systematization around all
of this. That's right. We'll be
Working. Yeah.
Great. Thank you. Thank you for your answers.
Okay. Raymond. Raymond? Yep. Thank you. Um, good morning.
Uh, you were saying that, um, from next year
that you'll be publishing in your annual reports, um, the
progress on your treaty settlement obligations.
So has the report, um, that the Auditor General released,
did that prompt that
or has this been something that you've been thinking about
for, for a while beforehand?
Have just that we're recorded as well
and
National senior manager Maori?
Um, the establishment of the Maori Crown team this year,
at the beginning of this year is really a clear signal
of our, of the intent of our organization.
And we are fully aware that we do require a whole
of system approach towards our obligations and settlements
because it, you know, like we, we acknowledge that we need
to do better, but the signaling
and I guess the establishment of this team, uh,
is a signal actually to the, to the organization
and to all of us that have different parts of
what we are working on here to bring it all together and,
and basically if I have a whole of system approach
and a home to bring to align everything
and streamline everything.
So just to go to your questions, both to
and I are relatively new, so some don't have a lift
experience having been here for, for terribly long.
Um, if this was under consideration
before, certainly the Auditor General's report
would've sharpened our focus on it. Mm.
Okay. Okay. So supplementary please.
If so, um, I'm sorry,
I can't recall if this was mentioned earlier.
So how many people are in your team now that,
that this team, my team that you've, um,
um, there are three.
Three. Okay. And do supplementary, please keep going.
Do you feel that, um, uh, within the organization,
um, that there's enough, uh, kind of, um, avenues
to get the information you need to progress
with the, the copa?
Um, there are avenues,
But we also, um, have data issues
and, um, you know, there, there's, uh, quite a lot of data
that needs to be collected
to also meet some of the commitments.
So that is also about our system being able to, um,
manage any additional data requests.
So, um,
Are you able to give an example of, of some of the
Data issues? Can I come,
can I come back to you on that one?
Probably a good, if I may a good one with that,
that distinction between RFI properties
and multi protection mechanism properties,
that's an absolutely classic, it's
gone through the process properly.
It's evade law, it's met its obligations,
but we suddenly look at it and realize,
actually we couldn't say it was something
of the two 30 disposed of
which ones were specifically under MPM versus RFR.
That's a classic example of that. They, they charge,
We don't really have a oversight
of the Maori protection mechanism.
Um, so, you know, those are the things that we need
to unpack as an agency.
Okay. Thank you. That's enough.
Here's a good luck. Bit of a, a question from,
uh, out outta left field.
Are you currently getting any complaints from any
of the settled Maori uh, entities?
Um, I did ask, I asked that very question.
Do we, well, actually the specific question asked is have we
had any complaints around the settlement process,
the settlement obligations and the inquiries we've made?
No. Okay.
Okay. Greg?
Yeah. Um, um, um, which you said earlier on,
uh, you mentioned, uh, the role of Lins in terms of,
can you just speak more about in terms
of the relationship between you and them?
Just bear in mind that they're the next
agency we be speaking to?
Yeah. Um, generally I'd say overall,
generally we have very positive
working relationship with Lens.
Um, and we deal with them both on recent legislative reform
and on the practicalities of, uh, management of Crown Land.
Yeah. Uh, we, we, we follow their process
and whilst they have some information, it's probably best
to direct detail questions on that process to them.
But basically once a, once a property is identified for
as surplus, that triggers automatically
it going into that process.
Okay. There is a hefty due diligence phase where we, well,
we would instruct a, a professional service provider to go
and do detailed due diligence on the property in question,
identify RFIs, MPMs,
any other PWA offer back any other hooks
or legal leanns, whatever it might be over that property.
They work through that process.
Once all of those have been any obligations identified,
have been met, you then go into the actual sale process.
And if it's not disposed on fire, NPM or RFR
or off the back that goes on the open market.
Okay. So all of your obligations, all
of your treaty obligations will be essentially delivered in
partnership with or through limbs
In relation to property disposal?
Yeah. Correct. We, we, we follow that the process
that they manage administer,
And you, and you have confidence in the
processes, um, that
They're following to, to, to assist you in as said, we,
we asked the question, have we had any complaints about this
and we hadn't identified any.
Right. Um, and to my knowledge, relatively inexperienced,
but the, in this space, but it's a very thorough process.
Okay. And the consequences, well, you can never predict
what is not gonna be found out during a process like this.
Um, so it's not entirely simple
and sometimes these processes kind
of loop back to earlier stages.
Um, but
that's the point about 'em being thorough
that they do do that. Yeah.
Okay. Good. Could I ask a question about TE Hayato
that relatively new, uh, um, tool for the Crown, et cetera,
and, uh, you've been engaged with the, the process at your,
your comments of your early engagement with IT
and any potential recommendations of
how you feel it could, um, improve?
Oh, Um,
We've, um, recently updated to,
we're a little bit late just
because we needed to collate the information,
but we have done it from, um, NZ t's perspective.
Um, it is still new tool TPK actually undertakes training.
So we've been on some really good training, which is,
I think part
of this work is about capability building within
our own organization.
So if we can, we can utilize other tools
and other training that agencies have for us, I think
that's really helpful.
I think it's fair to say we're probably still getting used
to, um, used to, to jta.
Um, and probably the only question would be, um, really
that we can discuss with our TPK colleagues is around
how often they do update the legislation.
'cause that's not clear to us.
But to our point is we also actually need
to improve our record keeping.
So we actually have our own register of, um,
our own obligations rather than relying on, um, a,
another tool from the Crown to, um,
basically adhere to those. So. Okay.
Yeah. So it's, it's, uh, endeavoring to, to report on a,
an annual cadence with regards to it,
the timing during the year.
Is it problematic with your cycle or anything like that?
Like we just noted that the, we, we asked for sort
of an update from where they couldn't provide it
because there were a number of organizations such
as yourselves that still had to do some stuff before it.
Is there a timing problem with their, the,
what they're trying to do in the reporting end?
I think, I mean, we, we were a couple of weeks late.
I think the deadline was 30th of June.
We were done by the end of July.
Um, that was because we were, again, finding
and validating some of the information we needed
to put in routinely.
And given the volume of what we are talking about,
I don't foresee that being a particular problem
for us in current circumstances. So
You won't have the lateness next year?
You'll, you'll sort of Yeah,
And probably, um, we try
and update it at least in the first year, every quarter.
That would therefore fit into our, our,
um, reporting cycles.
And therefore we'll get a better picture of
that when our annual report comes out, um, in
The next year.
Okay.
Um, I just wanna get a sense of, um,
that such things as how old is the oldest obligation,
um, you're dealing with
and who actually follows up on what, what sort of the,
um, process?
Um, 'cause I I, we've been told
that there's different reasons why that might be.
Um, and it's hard, well, certainly hard for me
to understand, um, how
and why things don't get done in a timely fashion.
Um, so I think I'm not, I I would happy to get back to you
and we can provide facts on kind of the,
the, your points on the timing.
I can't, don't have my fingertips what the earliest
of the settlements is, but it's back in the nineties.
Um, in terms of the, uh, in terms
of all the property related obligations, um, those,
the RFIs have durations of a hundred years and more.
Um, and the, as it were, they, the, those processes
to full disposal are trigger for the RFIs are triggered
by the decision to make to the, the lab the surplus
in relation to kind of the signage.
Um, as I said, we, again, this is one where our records need
to be, uh, need to be smartened up.
Um, but again, over a, over a period of a few years,
we would expect all signage changes to flow through
through our maintenance contracts.
Um, I think probably the best characterization is we pick
these things up in our BAU processes
because there are multiple reasons why they'll happen,
of which the settlement obligation is one example
where we have recognized we need to improve
and become more mature is in that specific recording of,
yes, we have done that and
therefore that particular piece is categorically satisfied
and we can positively affirm that.
So it's almost like you need different processes, like
for a more simple,
But so closing the loop of the information. Yeah.
So RS be really difficult
'cause you say they could go on for years,
But again, that is from our perspective
of within the process and we're compliant with the law
and we're meeting the obligation.
Mm-hmm. Sometimes it's quick, sometimes it's slow and yes.
But that those processes will endure just
as the RFR obligation endures.
So
Thank you, Richard.
Um, I, I wanna return to the, the lack
of a specific line item budget for, for a lot of this stuff.
I think you mentioned that you've been able
to work within your other budgets to be able
to accommodate some of the work that's being done here.
That sounds risky to me, uh, for, for you to try
and, uh, get success in, in
what you're endeavoring to do here.
Um, is there anything that you, in your role
as the general manager system leadership,
is there anything in your role that you're trying to change
to, to give you more confidence that you're not gonna get
to the point where you, you've always been able
to grab a bit of money out of this line item over here,
but it's no longer there for something. So, um,
Yeah, I might just kind of, uh, politely disagree
with the characterization around riskiness.
Sure. Um, the, we, we make provision
for, and this is the, uh, as it were, this is the flip side
of, of the information loop challenge,
because we absorb these in our business as usual budgets
for operations
and maintenance, which is hundreds of millions a year.
And the, because the,
this is an RFR settlement under an RFR obligation under a
particular settlement is one of many types
of disposal situation that we would be meeting.
Actually, that gives me confidence
that we will be picking those up.
And we have hard obligations on our maintenance contractors
that you check the signage against the NZ geographic board
and it's most recent and
that you are obliged to put them in.
So actually from wakata as a whole, in terms
of meeting those property and signage things,
I personally think it's a good thing
that there is the process and it's embedded
and baked into what we do routinely.
Um, as far as other funding.
And if we, uh, kind of, if settlements expanded
or were different, uh, different in nature in terms
of specifically looking at
and particular types of investment
or transport, transport services to be
provided, yes, that would be where I'd be looking
for something for a different approach in terms of, we,
we'd still have to, uh, dovetail that into how we deal
with the board's independent decision making
and the prioritization that we all would, that, that we put,
given that there's always more projects competing
for funds than there is ever funds available.
But that is exactly where I would then be looking for,
as you say, an identified budget, budget pool
or line item to meet the specific obligation over time.
Where, where do you think Waka, Corte as an organization,
uh, prioritizes, uh, this,
these obligations in the organization?
Um, that's a very
difficult question to answer, to be honest. And do you
Saying, how do you demonstrate what you're
Gonna do? Yeah, so
we will be doing a better job of demonstrating it
as so when we, as we, uh, mature our practices
around information as we report in our annual report, um,
as we have that information also flowing more routinely
through our internal management reporting, um, uh,
but particularly it's closing the information loop.
That is the absolutely critical piece for that,
because that at the moment we can be,
so we have no complaints on whether we fail
to meet an RFR obligation.
We know the process is robust around disposals.
What I, what I can't do,
because we don't have the information system set up
to do it, is positively affirm.
So I have no reason to believe not, we need
to do a better job of being able to positively affirm.
Okay. Very good. Supplementary, please.
Um, you came into the role, um, Richard about a year ago.
Correct. And, uh, just out of curiosity,
when there was the handover from your predecessor to you,
um, did this,
did treaty obligations feature in the, in the conversation?
Uh, yes. Uh, but specifically in the,
and also in the fact that we had created a new team for it,
which at the time was, had, had no staff in it.
Um, and that my, one
of my first jobs coming into the role was to recruit the
RA Maori relationships, hence.
Thank you. Well, I think we're exhausted
of questions for you today.
And may I just say, well, first of all, thank you very much
to the three who for, for coming here today.
Uh, I, we we're far more well informed with regards to W
of ate, and it's very pleasing to, to hear perhaps
what you might call the uplift in, in the recent year of
what the focus is in this, what we consider,
and we should all consider is a very important area,
uh, area of your business.
Um, you know, we, we have been through a, um,
we have been through a history of the crown, um,
where it has shown, uh, to be very apologetic for, uh,
bad outcomes prior.
Um, so, so we want
to make sure we don't have bad outcomes moving forward.
And so the, the whole purpose of this briefing
that we're doing right now is to understand, uh,
but also to be able to take the information we along here
and see what else we can do with other, uh, conversations
that we can have as a committee.
So I appreciate, um,
all the information you brought for us today.
I, I thank you, uh, for your work
and also for your concentration
and the fact that there, you, there clearly w um, sees
that there needs to be more work done in the space,
hence there's other roles dedicated to it in, in itself.
So, uh, with that, um, hopefully in a,
if we do have the opportunity in a year's time
to come back together, you can be sitting there
and saying, well, we've nailed this, we've nailed that.
That'll be a great outcome as far as I Thank you. Okay.
I'm consultant.